Interviewer [00:00:01] Okay, great. So to begin, can you describe your professional background and your training in psychedelic therapy and art therapy or any sort of art practice you may have?
Participant [00:00:14] Yeah. So I have my masters in expressive art therapy with a specialization in art therapy, and I got that from [University A] in 2012. I'm also an LMHC and I have a private practice. I work with children, adolescents, young adults and adults. I don't work with any older adults. I have a practice that is both in-person and virtual, and I do all of my children and adolescents in person. And I use art therapy with anyone who's willing. My psychedelic therapy training is predominantly in ketamine assisted psychotherapy. So I have partnered with [Organization A] and have been working with them for a little over a year and I to offer ketamine assisted psychotherapy to about, about seven clients at this point. So that has been something that's been happening within the past year as part of my practice. And I've been involved in learning and like journal club groups in, in and about psychedelic assisted psychotherapy for about five, five years. But I don't have any additional formal training outside of the [Organization A] collaboration that they they have.
Interviewer [00:01:58] Okay, great. And so right now, the medicine that you primarily work with is ketamine.
Participant [00:02:03] That's correct. Yeah.
Interviewer [00:02:05] And how did you come to integrate visual art and psychedelic therapy or art therapy and psychedelic therapy? How did you come to this?
Participant [00:02:17] Those things are just like to me, obviously hand in hand, but that's because I'm in I just think because I have my own, like, personal relationship with psychedelics, which I think probably helped to inform ways in which I could imagine that pairing well in a more clinical setting. And so I, I guess to me, being like rooted in art therapy, I'm also trained in the internal family systems, which is, you know, a parts model and that pairs really well with expressive therapy. So in preparation and integration, externalizing parts is like really where we do the work and whether or not that's through visual art or metaphor, found objects, sand trays. I find that that all of that pairs just like really beautifully together. So yeah, to me, it just I couldn't not do it because that's just how I'm rooted in my clinical practice.
Interviewer [00:03:31] And so I'm curious about from your vantage point as an art therapist, like what your philosophy is about the use of art in therapy.
Participant [00:03:43] Yeah. I mean, for anyone who's open and I try to always offer it and as an option, but I don't you know, not everybody is, chooses that path. But I find that my philosophy with it is that it helps to externalize and helps to deepen the relationship that we have with our internal world. And that so often words are limited in the internal experience. So even. You know, answering a question visually that might come up in in preparation or in a journey, answering that question for yourself, visually to me can provide such a deeper and more rich understanding of the experience. So so my philosophy is that if we can tap into that and utilize our creative energy in that expressive way, then we're going to have an opportunity to feel more seen and more heard and our experiences are going to be more understood.
Interviewer [00:05:02] Yeah. Thank you. And I'm curious, how do you think visual art making contributes to the therapeutic process in psychedelic therapy?
Participant [00:05:27] Hmm, To me, for those that are willing to engage in the art making, they describe, you know, being able to put into the world an experience that would otherwise not be fully witnessed. And so even if it's not like a you know, I know like psilocybin, you know, you're having a lot more profound visuals than perhaps ketamine. Not that it can't happen, but certainly it is it is different. So I think with the clients that I have that are utilized, that are using ketamine. You know, even just being able to display like an experience of, I was able to feel more spaciousness between my thoughts. It felt more like they were passing me by. So if I were to say like, what would it look like if you were to put that on the paper, suddenly we're allowing for that experience to be deepened and that being like, you know, a pretty important part of this process of in the psychedelic medicines, right offering more internal spaciousness to be with what is difficult and so to then be able to take that into the art. To me, it just offers. I think a lot more like witnessing. And for those of my clients that engage in in that process, an opportunity to again yeah just like feel more understood in their process.
Interviewer [00:07:24] So what does it look like when you're working with clients? Like, can you walk me through the sort of like you have a new ketamine patient come in and when do you bring in the art making? And yeah, how, how you go through like the preparation, dosing, integration.
Participant [00:07:44] So I bring in the art from the beginning if if somebody is interested. So I was explaining like, you know, I am an art therapist and, and that that's my background. And so art will always be an option. And, you know, it looks different for different people. I'm trying to think right now I have a couple people that are doing ketamine assisted psychotherapy with me that are inclined to use art and enjoy that process. I find that there is. You know, an opportunity during intention setting if we're exploring different parts or having difficulty identifying, you know, what those intentions are, that we can shift and open up that process to utilizing art. I would encourage, you know, visual artmaking through drawing or collaging. You know, if somebody is in my office, it's a little bit more accessible to offer additional materials. But if they're at home, then they're limited to the materials that they have. But I always invite my clients to bring all their art materials. And once we so if I'm I offer all virtual ketamine assisted psychotherapy at this point. So during the medicine session. And so if I'm. If it's a session that is like a remote session that I'm present for is is, what I do, at least for the first few sessions and then depending on the client and the rapport we have, I they can do self-guided ketamine sessions. So I'm not present for that particular medicine session, but I always encourage them to do art if they want to. But yeah, so I would say just offering them the materials and having that available to them. Even just to, like, prompt, you know, it's not about what it looks like, it's about the process. And so if you can try to put down. So, so often people struggle with finding the words of what it what it was like in that internal experience. So just to help them to have permission to put it on the paper, but also without any pressure for it to be a replica or an exact reflection of what it was and more about like how did it make you feel or what colors or shapes or symbols, or were there any key images that really stood out? And how can you put that onto the paper in a way that will help to again, like deepen that experience in integration? And then in the integration process, it would depend on whether or not that person is if we're working, because again, like doing the internal family systems model, like if we have a part that's needing to be witnessed in a more visual way, or if we're working with parts that are wanting to release a burden and in a more visual or like felt sense kind of way, we can bring in the art there. And I would say that for clients who are more comfortable with the art making process that does tend to be like a very accessible option. And then for those who are maybe not as inclined to choose that as an option I still offer it, but maybe isn't really where they want to go.
Interviewer [11:36:00] So like what are some of the responses you get from clients when you offer art as an option?
Participant [11:45:00] Yeah. I mean, it's either yeah, I'll give that a try or no, I don't really want to do that today. It's like, you know, so if, if they're open to it, then, you know, I might suggest, you know, if there's something on your mind or, you know, if, if you have, you know, I always encourage people to trust their intuition and allow it needs to come through to be what comes through. So I start there always. And then if there isn't something that is necessarily, you know, kind of organically surfacing for them, then I'll utilize whatever content has been identified in the session or in, in the medicine, you know, session to, to then offer a prompt. So that might look like so, you know, you set an intention to find more clarity around all these uncertainties and anxieties that you've been, you know, coping with lately. And in your journey you noticed that there were some imagery or some messages that you received, some words that repeated or some images that repeated. How can we take that uncertainty, an anxiety that you've been feeling and transform that through this journey out onto paper? So that would be like a really open ended prompt. But I would if I have some clients that are needing like much more direct, much more directive art prompts and that might look like you know, doing a before, during and after. Okay before your session, let's do an image that reflects how you were feeling during the image or during the medicine session, what you were experiencing and then after. So something like that might just help to increase that person's self awareness of that, the process that they just went through.
Interviewer [13:48:00] Okay. Yeah. I'm curious with the clients that have been more interested in using art as part of their process. Have you noticed any sort of changes or benefits from bringing in the art making, perhaps compared to some of the clients that have not wanted to bring it in?
Participant [14:24:00] I am biased in this response. I'm going to be honest about that, because in some ways I do think that there is a, it does seem like those who have been more open to it are doing more intentional integration. And so I don't know that it's necessarily the art as much as it is like the process of integration and like the intention that goes into that because we can have a psychedelic experience. But if we aren't doing the preparation and the integration, it's a very different thing. And so for me, I've noticed that those who do seem to have the most benefit of the ketamine. It is those that are doing the integration and often those that are doing a more like intentional integration practice, like outside of our sessions and like utilizing art in session and outside of session. I do find that those people seem to be reporting like increased mood and behavior improvements. But I don't I can't be sure about like, is it the art or their process being more intentionally based and like that integration process?
Interviewer [15:55:00] what did you notice I guess when you are engaging with a client and the art process. Like how how do you I guess how do you feel during the session with them?
Participant [16:11:00] Umm. I mean, for me, it's like another form of language and one that I'm very comfortable with. So it feels like really connected and like to offer that creative space and to honor and witness it feels like a value. For sure. Yeah.
Interviewer [16:43:00] Are there any particular clients or memorable sessions where you feel like you've seen that visual art's played a crucial role in the client's therapy process?
Participant [17:00:00] Just in terms of the psychedelics.
Interviewer [17:03:00] Yeah, within the ketamine patients. Yeah.
Participant [17:07:00] I mean. You know, kind of just like scanning through the different clients that I've been working with. I have one client who had been really wanting to do more painting outside of session, like had been wanting to do painting like love painting, but had some parts that were just really getting in the way, like perfectionist parts and some, I think, probably depressed parts. And it was a really difficult combination for her to work through to, to get like tap into that creative energy and and to get into like a flow. But since she's been engaged in the ketamine sessions. She has been painting like a ton and finding it to be really like rewarding and a very peaceful experience. Something that she's really like enjoying, Like there's a playfulness to it. The content has been more geared towards imagery that she's experienced and like the the the colors and the, this person described imagery and feelings associated with like the song [Popular Song from Animated Film]. And so that has been the imagery and the colors and the sort of themes of her paintings. And that was a movie that she really resonated with and felt very like free. And deeply connected to nature as a child in particular. And so it's been really awesome to see. Like she's really done some pretty amazing inner child work with with a part that's been holding back, you know, a lot of insecurities. And so it's sort of like she's letting that that part have this opportunity to to be creative and to paint. And she's been showing me the image, the paintings in sessions. Which has been really beautiful to witness you.
Interviewer [20:01:00] Wow. Thanks for sharing. That's really nice to hear. I'm curious in terms of what your work, what challenges have you encountered when integrating art into the psychedelic therapy sessions?
Participant [20:18:00] Yeah, I would say people that are not as open to it, you know, that is always, we're not getting very far. I don't push it. So it's sort of like, you know, if that's not for you, that's fine. And I am thinking about this one person who, like before I started pairing partnering with [Organization A], I had a client do some ketamine sessions with a different provider and we did integration. And and we had done some preparation, but I wasn't there for the medicine sessions. And I'm just trying to think like she she needed. She really benefited from art. Communicating verbally was difficult for her in many ways. But it felt like her process of doing the art making was you know, as I'm reflecting on it right now, I guess a challenge maybe will be was what that particular person is like, her putting things on paper that she felt like she should like. well, I guess I should. I saw flowers, so I'll put flowers rather than being able to like deepen that into okay was there like an experience that you had around the flowers that was meaningful to you or taking it to that like next deeper level of integration? And, you know, that was her and her process and I think something that felt like a challenge for me, but maybe maybe wasn't for her. But. But kind of for her, it was it was difficult to for it to be more than just like, yeah, no, I just laid down and had this experience. It was it was harder for her to, like, deepen that experience into how does this apply to my day to day life and so you have flowers on the paper. Does this represent growth? Does this you know, those kinds of prompting questions were were like. I don't know. Maybe. So it was not an intuitive process for her. So maybe that was genuinely like more of a challenge for me as to like, okay, how do we take this to support this person to the next level.
Interviewer [23:05:00] And how so with that, how how did you address that with the client? Like when that comes up, even outside of ketamine sessions, how do you how do you typically address it?
Participant [23:18:00] Yeah, I mean, for her. There were a lot of. How do I address it? Okay. They tend to be sort of just like a more direct observation. Like I'm noticing that, you know, I have a part that seeing like the potential meaning of this. And, you know, I'm curious if that is landing for you or is there like any part of you that that does see that this might be reflecting, you know, the growth that you long for in your life or, you know, what does it mean to to plant a flower and to watch it bloom and to give it what it needs. And, you know, are we giving are you giving yourself what you need in order to be the flower that you want to be? So like that metaphorical using using that, I would be open to like just getting curious about it. I mean, she was a much more like concrete thinker. She definitely was like neurodiverse. Which probably played into some of the abstract piece being a little less approachable. But yeah, I guess that like the way that I would try to approach it is, is just by being curious and, and wanting to better understand their experience and always doing the U-turn for myself as the therapist to understand. Is this a part of me that's getting in the way? That's actually more challenge than than what they're going through. So engaging in supervision is another practice that I would engage in. To, to support, you know, my clients as well.
Interviewer [25:25:00] So from your vantage point, what what opportunities you see for further integration of visual art making in psychedelic therapy?
Participant [25:48:00] You did? Yeah. I think it's my Internet? I don't know.
Interviewer [25:50:00] So is it from from your vantage point, where where do you see opportunities for further integration of visual art and psychedelic therapy?
Participant [26:01:00] I, like on a grander scale. Like I. I envision. I would love to be doing more psychedelic assisted therapy. I do plan on getting trained in um I don't I haven't chosen my practice my program yet, but I do plan on getting an additional training in psychedelic therapy. And I was so bummed out that psilocybin didn't pass here in [State A] because, yeah, I don't have to explain that to you, but I so I guess, you know, I have dreams and hopes and goals of being able to engage in group work and retreat spaces where there is a focus on utilizing in particular eco art therapy I think is really important and I really don't have a great practice for that yet. But that is where my passion lies and where I would love to see myself as a clinician, as somebody who can support others, is integrating into the psychedelic experiences eco art therapy. So really wanting to use a lot of nature based metaphors, but also like being in nature and using natural found objects, doing art in nature. All that, I think, deepens our experiences, which is different than like a more clinical setting. But retreat spaces would be would be awesome. Group work, I think is really important. And in my training in internal family systems, I feel very drawn to like legacy unburdening. So like intergenerational and ancestral burdens that we carry and how you know, in in spaces where people are coming together and sharing in more of a group psychedelic experience. If there's intentions that are shared, engaging in collective unburdening as the group process and art being a really important part of that. In an individual way, but also in a group way. So whether that be like some type of group mandala or a mural or something that, you know, everybody contributes to, they get to take a piece of. I think that that integration of of the art and the group process and the psychedelics is primed and just a really beautiful potential for deep healing.
Interviewer [29:06:00] Yeah. And so I'm curious, like you've talked about doing more psychedelic therapy trainings or coursework, and what kind of training or resources would you recommend to other therapists that want to incorporate visual art into their psychedelic therapy work?
Participant [29:30:00] Yeah. Yeah. There are some amazing like I've joined into some webinars that I thought were really great of art therapists who are who are psychedelic therapists as well. I cannot think of their names right now. In [Organization A], there's a supervision group that's expressive art therapy and psychedelic therapy, so that's a really great space to tap into. And I really do like partnering with [Organization A] for that. For those reasons because they offer a lot of cool like supervision type opportunities and [Therapist A], who's like an IFS therapist. She integrates a lot of art into her retreats. I don't think she's trained in art therapy, but I mean, this is this is like one of those things that some art therapists feel very protective over. Like, you can't do art therapy unless you're an art therapist. You're doing art in therapy. And I think it's really important that I honor my training as an art therapist and really do place value on that. And I'm not a gatekeeper, and I don't think that only art therapists can do art therapy in in these types of settings. I do think we might have more language and different philosophies around it, but I personally think anyone can just bring it in and see what a client's willing to to explore in trusting the process that the client has within that I think is really important. But yeah, I mean, I really want to apply to the [University B] in [State B] to do my training.
Interviewer [31:34:00] So I did a KAP training that was taught by [Instructor A] last year. Yeah. And then I did a training in [City A] abroad. And I've done I've done most of my training in and abroad, so. And so [City A] and in [Country A], for psilobcybin training and now I'm working on the study. So I'm learning through doing like facilitating there. So it's been kind of a hodgepodge of things.
Participant [32:09:00] I mean, that's how it feels right now for me. I'm like, well dip my toe here and there and yeah, but, and it's, you know, obviously with MDMA, not again getting FDA approval, that was another huge step back and it just right now I feel like. I'm not sure where 2025 will take me in terms of my my training next, but I really want it to be grounded in, I would really love for it to integrate some type of the arts and [University B], but I do feel like they have a great, really important focus on honoring indigenous practices and making sure that we're like engaging ethically in psychedelic medicine. So that's that's an important piece of all of it. And I mean the arts in psychedelics go hand in hand historically, right? So to me it's like, okay, how can, how can we then honor that what already exists as we utilize it in a more clinical setting.
Interviewer [33:25:00] So we're coming towards the end of the questions that I have for our interview, and I'm curious if there's anything that you would like to share about your experiences with art and psychedelic therapy that I haven't asked that's coming to mind for you now?
Participant [33:44:00] I guess I would just share, like, my own experiences of using art therapeutically with psychedelics, you know, has been really rewarding and deepened, you know, my experiences and that even like as you know whether that whether it's sitting with and just sort of allowing materials to just be present and using them while like during using like a medicine or a post and the integration. I think there's just so much opportunity for things to come through that wouldn't otherwise have the opportunity, words would not be enough. And for me, having a visual, like even just this past week, I engaged in like a new Moon New Year ceremony, and of which I took some medicine and like a lower dose. So I was present with my materials and it's just so nice. I kind of created this vision board that came through as I was asking, you know, setting some intentions and asking some questions and to me I felt like now I have this visual that I can that I can have out that is so much more meaningful. And every time I look at it, something more can come through, as opposed to if I just were to write it down or just have the experience. To me, there's like this lasting, deepening that can then occur when you have that image there and like you build a relationship with it that so I guess, yeah, just wanting to share my own experience that is not necessarily facilitated by a therapist or in a clinical setting, but certainly is therapeutic.
Interviewer [35:51:00] Thank you so much. Yeah, I really appreciated you taking the time to share about your experiences. I'm going to stop the recording. Okay.